Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez, and
today I'm joined for a second time by Will
Starr. He is an author and journalist. Last time
we talked about his book The Status Game and.
Today we're talking about his latest book, The Stories
Deal How to Use the Science of Storytelling to
Lead, motivate and persuade. So Will, welcome to the
show. It's a pleasure to have you back.
Thanks, Ricardo, it's great to be back again. Thank
you.
So, what is the premise of your book?
Well, I wanted to write a book about how
the power that the story has to persuade people
to, to influence people, because it seemed to me
when I was doing my. Just general research for
other books that, that, that, that the story has
this extraordinarily extraordinary ability to sort of to to
beguile people to completely take over their brains and
really define their identity, so that that's what I
wanted to write about this time.
And what is storytelling? I mean, what are you
referring to when you talk about storytelling?
Well, um, well, that's a big question. So, uh,
yeah, well, I, I, how do you define story?
So, so, so my working definition of story for
this book is, it's a unit of information that
describes the overcoming of an obstacle in pursuit of
a goal, which sounds sort of quite dry. But
that's basically what a story is, it's it's it's
a little bit of information about obstacles and goals,
um, um. And it You know, it works, it's,
it's evolutionary purpose is to. Connect lots of individual
human brains together and get them all thinking as
one about the obstacles and goals. Of, of the,
of the world outside them. So, so, so, so
that's sort of hints at it's power really, you
know, humans are, we're one of five existing species
of great ape, you know, we're not like an
ape, we are an ape, but obviously we're very
different from the other apes. And that difference is
essentially that we're part ape, part ant. So the
other apes, even though they live in troops, they
overcome the obstacles and pursue their goals as individuals,
pretty much. Whereas humans don't, we do it as
we do it in the form of these superorganisms.
So like an ant's nest, um, we, we get
together and it's and cooperate, and it's the cooperative
group that overcomes the obstacles in pursuits of the
goals, not the individual. That's how, that that that
that describes all of human life from a cult
to a religion to an economy to a society
to a football team, to a corporation, you know,
you name it, that's how we do it. And
that's that's kind of how we've taken over the
world. And so how do you, how do you
get these apes, these individualistic apes to, to work
together to cooperate that we do it with a
story. You know, you know, that, that, that, that
unit of information that describes an obstacle and a
goal, takes over your brain and, and you all
start thinking as one and that and that's how
we do it.
So let's talk a little bit about the evolution,
evolutionary psychology of storytelling. So, first of all, what
are the origins of storytelling in human societies? I
mean, do we know how old storytelling is? Well,
no.
Exactly, the, the, the, the, the nearest um date
I could come across was somewhere between 300, and
100,000 years ago. So somewhere in that bracket, we
started using, you know, orienting our kind of lives
around story. And and the way I tell it
in a story is a deal is that there
are already 33 great phases of evolution of life
on Earth. The first phase is the single-cell bacteria.
So if you were to, if you were to
trace your family tree and go and go back
3.8 billion years, you'd find at the root of
your family tree the single cell bacteria, and for
hundreds of millions of years, that was the only
life on Earth. And so, so single cell bacteria
overgo obstacles in pursuit of survival reflexively. So it's
a reflexive technology, so it's quite straitjacketed. It's not
dynamic, basically, if the conditions outside my single-celled body
in inverted commas are X I do Y. So
you know, I could do a lot with that.
But, but, but, but the problem with that reflexive
technology is that um it, it's not very good
for dealing with unpredictable environments, and of course what
is, what is life, but not, if not unpredictable.
So then the second great phase was the emotion
system, the well the feeling system out of which
comes emotions and feelings are amazing because they don't
instruct their owner what to do, they advise. So
if you imagine you're a cat and you're a
hungry cat in an alleyway. And someone's dropped a,
you know, half a Big Mac by the bin,
and you feel the feeling of hunger, and you,
and so that, that makes you, that compels you
to want to go and get the burger. But
then on a roof up there is a cat
staring at you, and that brings another feeling which
is fear. And now you've got these two feelings,
and you can make a decision based on the
unpredictable environment about what to do. So, you know,
an incredible invention, but it really is an amazing
thing, and you know, for more hundreds and hundreds
of millions of years, it, it becomes the dominant
technology on, on earth, um, for. Overcoming obstacles in
pursuit of goals, I mean, of course, because we,
we come from single type bacteria, we come from,
you know, these intermediate animals, um, we still have
all this technology within us, so the immune system
is reflexive like a bacteria, the digestive system is
reflexive like a bacteria. Um, WE don't have any
conscious control over these things, they just happen. Um,
OF course we have a huge feed system, emotion
system, we're incredibly emotionally complex creatures. Yeah, but then,
as I say, between 1300 and 100,000 years ago,
this new thing came, which is even better than
than the than the feeding system. That's the story
system. And story allows us to share information about
obstacles and goals, swap information about obstacles and goals,
store it in culture in the form of oral
storytelling, and then subsequently writing. And of course, as
I said before, it allows us most importantly to
cooperate, to to all um um cooperate, collude uh
on, on, on obstacles and goals and work together
in the form of these ant-like super organisms. So
that in a nutshell is the is the history
of life on Earth.
Yeah, uh, and what are the functions of storytelling?
Does it serve specific social functions, for example?
Yeah, so, so I guess it's all nested beneath
that, the main goal which is to. Get, get
us, you know, working as individual members of these
highly cooperative superorganisms, and but, but so, so, so
that's the kind of the, the, the ground level,
but nested beneath that is this, you know, how
does storytelling. Affect us as individuals, so, you know,
so partly we, you know, most obviously we have
these storytelling brains and uh um and by that
I mean that we have the the the the
human brain remixes reality and turns it into a
story. So, you know, we are, as Chris Smith,
the neuroscientist, remember we said, the invisible actor at
the center of the world. And you know, you
know, unlike other animals have all these things going
on, we, we. We, um, have the plots of
our lives, we've got these meaningful journeys that we're
going on, we want to get stuff and, and,
and we imbue our journeys with, with great meaning,
you know, like, you know, great religious meaning or,
um, uh, you know, these sort of grand meanings,
um, we, um. Uh, WE, we, we have this
special effect of morality. So, you know, gossip was
one of the earliest, and perhaps the earliest form
of storytelling, and gossip, you know, gives us this
sense of heroes and villains and allies and teachers,
you know, that's this great storytelling kind of layer
that goes across, um, our, our, our, our, you
know, the, the, the things that we're doing with
our lives. Um, SO, so there are all kinds
of ways in which, you know, we have autobiographical
memory for the past, we imagine the future in
a way that no other, uh, no other animal
does, you know, we could, we could, we could
envision great quests, great, you know, great, great paradises,
great heavens, you know, no other animal has the
concept of heaven. Um, AND you know, earthly heaven,
which is could be the goal of some political
party or a spiritual heaven, which is the goal
of, you know, you know, the great religions. So,
so, so, so we, we have these storytelling brains,
so of course that has, you know, profound and
immense, um, um, consequences for, for, for our, for
our individual lives.
And why are we so attracted to storytelling? I
mean, is there any sort of uh psychological explanation
for that?
Yeah, so As I say, you know, storytelling is
the thing that allows us to work cooperatively. So
that's what nature wants to do, that's what evolution
wants us to do. It wants us to be
a successful cooperative animal. So it, it's always compelling
us to. Um, BE a good member of a
cooperative group. So what does that mean? Well, it
means two things. It means that a, we have
very powerful instincts within us that want to connect
with other people. You know, we, we know humans
are universally driven to seek connection with, with, with
like-minded others, not, not, not just anyone, with people
like us, with people who are good cooperative fit
for us who we can work together with. So,
so, so, so we're in this kind of restless
connect and detect mode, I call it, where, where
we're sorry, detecting connects so we're detecting, are you.
Like me, that's how we dress the way that
we do. We, you know, we have accents, we,
we, we, we, we have this dense cloud of
social information which broadcasts information about who we are
to other people. And, and, and that and that
broadcast is is for drawing us towards people who
are like good cooperative partners and repelling those who
might not. So of course that's the cause of
a lot of amazing stuff in our lives. That's
also the cause of cause of a lot of
division and, and problems in in human society. So
that's connection. So and if you think about some
of the most profoundly important moments in your life,
a lot of them are gonna be about connection.
They're gonna be moments of love and joy of
joy of friendship, joy of family, community, all of
that stuff. Um, AND likewise, if you think about
some of the worst moments in your life, it's
the opposite of that. So all universally humans dread
social disconnection, you know, rejection, ostracization. Um, uh, um,
THAT, that, you know, any kind of feeling that
we're being rejected socially is deeply, you know, we,
we'll be hurt, we will obsess over that thing
and try and fix it in our minds, try
and repair it. Um, SO, so that's the first
thing. You know, we, we, we want to connect
into cooperative relationships, whether, whether that be a, you
know, uh, yad or a, or, or, or a
group. The second thing is status. So once we're
in a cooperative relationship, we want to be useful
to it. We want to be a good cooperative
partner. So, so we want um to, to, to,
to develop the reputation of somebody who is valuable.
And and and and and that's the status system.
So, so, so status is simply. Um, THE information
from the people around us that we are of
value in some way, that we're competent, that we
are, um, you know, generous, selfless, virtuous in some
way. So, so, so we also seek that. So
again, if you think about some of the your
most. Pleasurable moments in life, some of the most
exciting moments in life, they're gonna be connected with
status, you know, when your podcast achieved X or
when you've got this dream guest on or whatever
it might be. When you've got your PhD, I
don't know what it is. And you know, same
as connection, some of the worst moments in life
are connected with humiliation, which is the sudden and
public removal of your, of your status. I mean
status, humiliation has been called the nuclear bomb of
the emotions, and it's connected with, you know, some
of the worst features of the human animal. So,
so, so, so. Connection and status are basically what
heroes in stories achieve. You think about, if you
think about a hero at the end of an
archetypal story, everybody loves them and considers them important
and amazing. And that's what we want in the,
in the story of our lives. We want, we
want those hero's awards of connection and status, and
we want them more than anything else. YOU know,
we want those things more than our, you know,
often we choose that kind of stuff more over,
you know, continuing to live our actual lives. That's
how we, that's how mad we are for collection
and status.
Yes. We'll, we'll come back to the topics of
connection and status later in our conversation. Uh, WHAT
kinds of stories do people usually like to tell?
People, well, that's that that that it depends on
what they're trying to get out of the story.
I, I, I guess people who are telling stories,
um. Uh, ARE trying to achieve ultimately, you know,
those two things connection and status. That's kind of
what we're always trying, we, well, we're trying to
achieve three things survival, connection and status. Those are
the three things that motivate humans. But, but, but,
so, so, so often storytellers will want to, want
to, um, uh, um. Achieve a sense of connection.
So, so, so you might get a politician or,
or a, or, or a business leader that tells
stories in such a way that they want people
to feel connected with their group and identified with
their group, so they're loyal to it and passionate
about it and start to devote their time and
attention and behavior towards that group. And then of
course the other thing is status, you know, storytellers
want to achieve the status of being a, you
know, a great storyteller, but also um successful leaders.
Kind of give status with their storytelling, they kind
of say I'm gonna tell you a story if
you join my group, if you join my mission.
If you buy my product. Your reward will be
status. If you buy this particular iPhone, if you
buy this set of training shoes, if you vote
for my political party, we're gonna make America great
again, you're gonna be, you know, a think different
creative genius like Apple promised you. You're gonna be
Michael Jordan, like Nike promised you. So, so, so,
so, so that, so, so connection states are the
kind of two things that storytellers are subconsciously offering.
So I would like to ask you now about
the concept that you talk about in your book.
What is active belief?
Yeah, active belief is, is this kind of concept
that I, that I I wrote about first in
the, in the status game, uh and I think
it's really important. So, so fundamentally, um, the brain.
What it wants more than anything is to. Achieve
connection and status, so it's always asking this question,
who do I have to be in this time
and place, in order to achieve connection and status?
And, and those questions are especially important when we're
growing up, that's what kind of childhood is, we're
figuring out our environment, we're figuring out our culture,
we're figuring out. Who we have to turn ourselves
into and when we're doing that with, you know,
parents are telling us that, teachers are telling us
that, experience is telling us that. So so so
so that's what human brains are all that's the
question that human brains are always asking. And so
that that's kind of why we're so um uh
vulnerable to story because story contains those answers, and
the brain isn't particularly interested in the truth of
reality, there's no, no, no, no, no reason to
be. What it wants is to, is, is to
figure out who I have to be in order
to earn connection and status. So, uh, if you,
if you think about it in terms of, sorry,
that's my, um, this is my dog, hello James,
you're on a podcast. Um, IF you think about
that in terms of religion, which is the easiest
one to explain, you know, someone you've got to
go away now. Um, SOMEBODY, um, wants to be
a Christian. And um so. In order to achieve,
you know, so because that's a status game, and
we, you know, we want to achieve connection, we
want to achieve status, so. Christianity is a great
status game to play because that's offering those things.
So how do we, how do we, how do
we achieve those things? Well, to be connected into
the game of Christianity is pretty easy. You've got
to believe. And you, you've got to, the main
thing you've got to believe is that Jesus was
real and that he, he died, and he was
dead for 3 days and he rose again. And
if you believe that, you're a Christian, you're basically
going to be accepted into the wider Christian family,
because that's that's what you have to believe in
order to be a Christian, OK? Um, BUT that's
not really enough, so that's fine, you're a Christian.
But now you're a Christian at the bottom of
the Christian status game, now you wanna be a
good Christian, you wanna be able to go to
your church every Sunday and have people look you
in the eye and go, there's a great Christian.
So that's where active belief comes in. It's not
good enough for human beings just to believe something.
You have to allow that belief to take you
over. You have to, you, you have to allow
that belief to define your identity. You have to
become that Christian. So that means, you know, living
by the 10 Commandments, eating fish on Fridays, going
to church on Sundays, going to confession, um, you
know, and so on and so on and so
forth, and of course every denomination of Christianity has
slightly different. You know, rules and and and ways
of being which defines the Christian hero, so that
so that's active belief and that and that and
that kind of works kind of across all all
groups, you know, if if if you go to
work for a corporation, they will have a. Um,
A model of perfect kind of ideal heroism that
they want everyone to be, and, and the greater
you adhere to that model of ideal kind of
heroism in that, in that corporation, the higher you'll
theoretically climb up the status scape of the company,
the more money you'll get, the more, you know,
the more rewards you get and all and all
of that stuff.
Yeah. Uh, WHAT is the process of identification and
what role does it play in storytelling?
Well, identification is, is really, um, critical to storytelling
and and and that's whether you're writing a novel
or whether you're leading a company or a political
party. You know, and, and, and, you know, before
I was talking about that kind of detect and
connect mode we're we're always in, so we're always
subconsciously looking for potential cooperative partners, people, people like
us to hang around with. And um and it's
a natural thing. Um, AND it's, uh, as I
said, it's the cause of lots of terrible things
that we're upset about in the west, but it's
also an, an, any radical part of human nature,
you're not gonna get rid of that kind of
people like us thing, um, and. And and so
that's kind of what identification is. If we're reading
a novel or watching a film and the person
on that screen is somebody that we identify with,
then we're gonna be into that story because, because,
you know, that's somebody that we care about. It's,
it's someone like us and so, sort of a
part of our brain, it kind of becomes us,
and we start following that character's ups and downs
and trials as almost as if they're happening to
us. And the more we identify with that character,
the more we care about that character, the more
we get kind of into it. Um, YOU know,
and, and that's also, you know, important for persuasion.
So if, if a political party is trying to
get voters, if a corporation is trying to get
customers, they have to tell a story with which
their, you know, potential voters and customers identify. And
and if they identify with that with their story,
then they're gonna be in. And that and that's
kind of a magical thing for the leader because
once, once the people are in, um, they're in.
You know, you've been your story has become part
of their identity, which means they're gonna defend your
group. Like they're defending themselves because in a sense
they are defend they're defending themselves, they've taken on
board, you know, they've folded your identity into their
identity.
And what kinds of psychological effects does identification have?
In the book, you go through several different examples
like changes in personality, uh, the way we perceive
beauty, our political beliefs, our moral behavior. So could
you tell us about that?
Yeah, so that's that, so that's so, so if
you, you know, if you remember that the point
of this is that we become good cooperative partners.
So it's not a passive process. Once we, once
we once we join a group uh that we
identify with, um. That group starts to change us.
We, we, we become more like that group, and
so everybody in that, everybody's in that group becomes
more similar to each other. So that, that's the
persuasion and it's changing us quite profoundly. And there
are loads, there's lots of different work that shows
different ways this is, you know, this happens, you
know, 11 test look at, you know, fur, you
know, furries, you know, people who dress up as
fur, you know, you know, furries if we have
those furries. So, so, so, so when they, when,
when they, um. Test the person to give furries
big five personality tests, they find that when they've
got their first soda on, when they're all kind
of suited up in their crazy animal costumes, their
personalities all change in sync. You know, they become
more extrovert, they become less neurotic, they become um
more open, you know, so, so their personalities, they're
big five personalities that all change, and they all
change in the same direction, that's, you know, that's
one. You know, probably my favorite, um, example of
this is about architects and about how identification changes
our perception of beauty. So. You'll have noticed that
that new buildings don't look like old buildings, like
new, new buildings across the world. Um, THEY all
look the same. They, they don't have a sense
of place, they don't have um lots of um
architectural detail. They're flat, they're square, they have no
pitched roofs, they're flat roofs, they're shiny, and they
all look the same. And so, um. You might
think, well, that's because people are obsessed with money
and these are cheaper buildings to build than the
posh buildings we used to get in that old
era. But that's not true. That those buildings that
people don't really like get built because architects think
they're beautiful. So architects have this unique taste in
which they love the aesthetics of modernism, and they've.
Loved the sense of modernism for getting on for
100 years now. They call it modernism, and it's
actually very old, old fashioned look. And so there
was a really fascinating study, um, uh, that, that
looked at how architectural students' aesthetic preferences change, and
it tracks the changing of their preferences as they
went through architectural, um, courses at university. So at
the very beginning of the course, they, they, they
tested their aesthetic preferences generally by showing them pictures
of beautiful people and ugly people. And they found
that they, when they compared the architects to the
general public, they were the same. They found the
same people pretty and and sexy, and they found
the same people ugly and and and you know,
unattractive fine. um AND they tested their um pre
their aesthetic preferences with buildings, and they, they weren't
as similar, but they were pretty similar, they were
almost the same. But then every year they checked
them as they went through university, those architectural preferences,
they changed, and they all changed in the same
direction. They all started to like flatness, shininess, no
roofs, you know, lack of ornamentation and detail, all
the things that exist in the buildings around you.
And what's amazing to that is is it's like
you can't argue that that what happens is that
um these students are being taught. This aesthetic genius,
because, because they're not, like if they were all
having different esoteric tastes and preferring different things, that
would be true, but they're not, they become more
and more conformist, and they all end up liking
these same shiny flat square buildings. And and that's
the main reason we have such ugly hideous. That's
when you, when you go to a city. Everybody
wants to go to the old town. Nobody ever
wants to go to the new town, they don't
want to go to the old town because we
have this curse of this, um, this architectural status
game which says that flat, shiny square is beautiful
and people who like classical and old and and
buildings that are appropriate to their place are low
status and, you know, plebs, even though that that
that survey after survey after survey all around the
world shows that by a long way the general
public prefer the old style buildings. So so that
that that's a really powerful example of how identification.
CHANGES aesthetic preference. I mean there's, there's also there's
there's even, there's a huge amount of work, which
I'm sure you're aware of, which looks at our
political beliefs and and and even though people find
this idea repugnant, that, that, you know, what what's
found over and over and over again is what
defines our political beliefs is not our own, you
know, freely. Um, PERCEIVED, but, um, decisions about how
the world works and how the world ought to
work, what principally defines our political beliefs or what
our political group believes, and, and, you know, so,
so 11 study managed to persuade. Um, uh, YOU
know, Republicans in America to endorse lavish welfare schemes
if they were if they were persuaded to believe
that that's what their party wanted, and, and, and
likewise they, they, they managed to persuade Democrats to
slash welfare once they were persuaded that that's what
the Democrats wanted to do. So, so, so and,
and as you know, as I say, people hate
that idea, they, they really fight against it because
that's not. The story that we want to tell
about ourselves, but, but, but identification is massively important.
And, and of course it's one of those things
you can see very much clearly in other people.
You don't like to think about yourself that way.
But, but it's, but you can see it in
other people, you know, you know, you can see
in, in your daughter who becomes a swifty and
suddenly becomes obsessed with Taylor Swift, talks about nothing
but Taylor Swift, starts dressing like Taylor Swift. Holding
a body like Taylor Swift, you know, like they
become like a mini Taylor Swift because they've identified
so powerfully with her. And so it's, it's so
it's that process, you know, it's it's it's a
bit like, you know, the demonic possession from a
horror movie. It's what happens to us all the
time and the more possessed we we become by
our identity group, um, the more that active belief
kicks in and the more we more our entire
being, our entire self starts to mimic. You know,
the, the, the values and roles and the the
the ideal model of hero that that group broadcasts.
Do we know how storytelling develops in infants? I
mean, when they start uh appreciating storytelling and, I
mean, perhaps, uh, some of the steps they take
in terms of, um, how they become appreciative of
it.
Well, yeah, so we, we do know quite a
bit about that. I mean, for me, one of
the most important things is, is this idea of,
of gossip, because I, I, I think, you know,
we, we start to really become storytelling telling animals
when we start to gossip. And gossip is thought
to be perhaps the earliest form of storytelling evolutionarily
speaking, because it's gossip that allows us to work
in these. Highly cooperative, like, you know, um, super
organisms, so, so what we, it was only when
we could start to gossip and uh uh because
gossip is really information about is this person being
a good member of the superorganism or not. And
if they are, we, we, we raise them and
if they're not, we punish them and and that
so that's, that's, that's how we police in the
group and getting the group to work. And so
we know that that children start to gossip almost
as soon as they can talk. So as soon
as they can string a sentence together, they're telling
these little tittle tattle stories about what my brother
did and what my sister did, what somebody did
at kindergarten, and someone pulled my hair. You know,
it's completely innate and it and it and it
and it and we do we we do it
straight away. So, so, so from that perspective, it,
you know, it kicks in really early. And of
course, you know, from before we can talk, our
parents are telling us stories, morally inflected stories. And,
and, you know, uh, the book, my book is
called A Story is a Deal, and that's what
I mean, it's like a story, a successful story
is always subconsciously making that deal with your identity.
If you behave in the, in the way that
the story is modeling, you're gonna get connection, you're
gonna get status. So children's stories are very clear.
He he's he he's a hero, he's Goldilocks, he's
Jack and his beanstalk, and look what happened when,
when they were naughty. They, they, they lost their
connection, they lost their status. Look what happened, they
were good. When they won the connection, they won
status. And we tell those stories over and over
and over and over again to our children and
our children become fascinated by them. They want to
hear them over and over and over and over
again, and there's the deep subconscious reason for that
is because it's information about how do I get
connection, how do I get status, and it really
bursts into adult life in early adolescence. So it's
in early adolescence that we leave the family home
and join our peer groups, and it's around that
it's in early adolescence that a part, a specific
part of our brain changes that, that, that, that,
that, um. Makes us very sensitive to social judgment
from from other people, so so so so so
that's when we start becoming, you know, we forget
about the family life and it's that our peer
groups, this which have much more influence over us,
so we, we, you know, that active belief starts
to be. About, you know, the, the, the, the,
the, the peer group that we're hanging out with
as a 1213 year old at our, our new
big school.
So earlier we talked about identification. Tell us now
about the phenomena of identity growth and identity anxiety
and how do they connect to storytelling.
Yeah, so, so, you know, I said before that
the, the, you know, connection and status of these
things that humans overwhelmingly want and time and time
again humans choose status over, over their own actual
lives, you know, whenever a terrorist fires a, you
know, blows up a suicide vest or. Or somebody
goes to war, you know, we, we're choosing our
identity over life. So, so, so we are completely
obsessed with our connection and our status, and, and
our brains are constantly monitoring. How are we doing?
Does this person like me? Do they not? Does
this person value me? Do they not? And if
we, if we get the knot, we start to
get really, you know, we, we start to get
really panicky, we start to get really, um, full
of anxiety. We even become physically ill. I mean,
you know, that it, it, it, it's been, we
know, we've been told time and time again over
the last 20 years how badly. How bad social
disconnection is for us, you know, loneliness is for
us, it has become well known now, but less
well known is also, it's, it's the same for
status, you know, like, um, the, the, the, the,
the, the, the less status we perceive that we
have, the more likely we are to get ill.
There, there was one study that that gave a
bunch of people, they exposed them to rhinovirus and
the people at the top of the status hierarchy
were less likely to then get a respiratory infection
as a result of the exposure than the people
at the bottom of the hierarchy. So, so, you
know, so it's so, so there's lots of evidence.
That that low status is, is bad for us
physically. So, so, so, so that's what I call
identity growth. I identity growth is, you know, is,
is, is we're living a great life is when
we, when we, when our energies grow, and by
that I mean, uh, you know, we, we, we're
getting ideally more connection than ever, but, but at
least it's stable. We're not losing connection, becoming lonelier
and lonelier, and, you know, we want to be
getting more status as we get older, you know,
ideally gradually, I think sudden rises in status are
very bad for us. Um, USUALLY, um, so, so
that gradual rise in status, so that's identity growth,
um, but also that, you know, we get identity
anxiety where, when, when we sense that our stores
of connection status are at risk and imperiled, we
get deeply anxious and I, and I, and I
think that sense of identity anxiety is. Such a
huge part of life in a 21st century market
economy, you know, it's quite, you know, in a,
in a hunter gatherer group of 25 to 50
people, that's who we'd be living side by side
by every day. It's relatively straightforward. You've got to
be a half-heated person, you'll get your connection, you'll
get your status, but we live in these vast
groups now, we've got social media now, you know,
we've got these models of heroism, you know, they're
they're literally models, you know, they're. The most, you
know, we, we, we, we see on our TV
screens and our computer screens incredible superhuman feats. So
that's, so we, so we're measuring against ourselves against
these, these extraordinary people, um, you know, connection is
harder and harder to, to sustain in these in
in these big groups. So I think identity anxiety
is a is a is a very serious thing
and we know that. Um, IT correlates with suicide,
but you know, when, when people feel chronically lacking
in connection and status, and, and importantly, when they
feel that that lack is irreversible, when they think
they're stuck and that there's no, there's no good
happy ending to their story, then they, then they're
very likely to become suicidal. And again, choosing. Identity
over their actual lives.
Right. But talking about connection, what kinds of psychological
effects does the feeling of being connected have on
people?
Psychological effects. Well, I mean, all the good ones,
I mean, we, you know, we, we, we, we
feel joy, we feel happiness, we feel like our
lives have meaning and purpose, you know, the, the,
the feelings of, of being securely connected are, you
know, are, are, are, are profoundly important to the
human animal, because that's, so you know, 11 of
the great things that, that the human brain wants
us to achieve because it's directly connected to our
survival, you know, as our brains are evolving, the
more securely connected we were. The greater the chance
that we were going to survive and have children
that survived, and it is, and it's the same
status, you know, like that that's, that's, that's just
as important because the more in in hunter gatherer
groups, the more, you know, they they they they've
got relatively flat hierarchies, um, compared to our hierarchies
today, but still in hunter gatherer groups, the more
the status that you have in that group, the
more food you've got, the better food you've got,
the safer your sleeping sites, the greater your access
to choice of mates, which is obviously of course
something that people really want. Um, uh, YOU know,
the great, the better the conditions of life for
your children. So, connection status are both directly connected
to our survival and reproduction, which is why they're
so important to, to, to humans, and that's why
we have such amazing feelings when we, when we
experience those things.
How do political figures take advantage of the power
of identification and connection in their speeches?
Well, The main thing, as I say, is that
is that human brains don't really care about truth.
What they care about is what do I have
to believe in order to get connection and status
within this group that I identify with. So, so,
so, so, so, so that's a massive shortcut for
leaders. They don't really have to tell you the
truth. You, you know, like. Brexit, to give a
controversial example, it didn't matter, like it didn't matter,
um, uh, that, that the, the, the, I, I,
I suspect a lot of the Brexiteers knew full
well that it was economically going to be an
absolute disaster for Great Britain. But they appealed to
the story and so so so so so so
they, they achieved identification by by saying we share
your concerns and you know there were there were
famous adverts about endless queues of migrants queuing to
get into Britain. We share your concerns, we're like
you, so they're identified. And then they tell them
a story, we're gonna take back control, and that
story is um. A story that promises status, and
the most powerful political stories are always stories that
promise status. So if you think about, you know,
Hope, the Obama story, uh, one of our most
successful politicians, Tony Blair, New Labour, New Britain, you
know, is an optimistic, hopeful, promising status, uh, Make
America Great Again, uh, Hitler's Third Reich, um, the
communists and their paradise of equality that they were
going to achieve, uh, in which nobody would, would
suffer and everybody would be living in. Kind of
this heavenly harmony, these are all promises of uh
of this kind of better tomorrow. So, so those
are the stories that work. And you know, and
still our lots of our politicians struggle to kind
of get their head around this. Um, YOU know,
Kamala Harris struggled to tell a story of hope.
It was all about horrible Trumpy and horrible, you
know, men and and all this stuff. It doesn't
work and and and and we, we have a
similar problem in the UK, Keir Starmer, our current
Labour government. They they're getting a bit better at
it, but, but they, they spent the 1st 3
or 4 months just telling it endlessly gloomy story
about what an awful mess Britain was in because
of the last government. Uh, PEOPLE don't give a
shit. It might be true. It doesn't matter, the
truth doesn't matter. It was, and and so they
became incredibly unpopular, that government. They they're turning it
around a bit now, but they've become incredibly unpopular
despite having, you know, won quite convincingly, uh, because
the story said it was so bloody awful, it
was just doom and gloom and misery, and nobody
wants to hear that from up there from their
leaders.
Do you think that the effects of connection are
more salient in collectivist societies than individualist societies, or
is there no effect there?
Yeah, I, I don't know any data that's looked
specifically at that, but I certainly suspect that that
is true. But it but sometimes it's hard to
separate, you know, those things, um. Because if you
think about your, like if you're. If you're if
you're in East Asia, a collectivist society and you're
a loyal communist. Um, uh, YOU know, um, you're
still playing a, a status game because you want
to be seen as a good loyal member of
the, you know, of the, of the Chinese Communist
Party, um, so. So, so, so, so yeah, I'm
not sure the differences will be as pronounced as
you might imagine, like, like nobody is immune from.
The status game, as was discovered in the Soviet
Union, which became, you know, which, which at one
point, sociologists found 12 distinct social classes in the
Soviet Union, um, or they didn't get rid of
the status game as they promised, they just inverted
it so the people who were at the top
were out at the bottom and the people who
were at the bottom went out at the top.
You know, and, and, and, and that's what that's,
that's always what happens with these utopians is they,
is they, is they promise they're going to get
rid of the status game and they, and they
can't because it's in our brains. It's how we
experience the world. They just want the new hierarchy
with themselves at the top and their enemies at
the bottom. It's what, you know, that was the
woke thing as well, you know, they're just, they're
just trying to invert the hierarchy, they're not trying
to get rid of it.
Does what you explore in the book connect in
any way with Robert Childalini's principle of persuasion of
unity or people being motivated by shared identities?
Yeah, exactly. I mean I I I think I,
I think so, yeah, so that it, it sounds,
it certainly sounds very similar, um. We are, you
know, that that's what identification is really, you know,
we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we
see somebody who with whom we somewhat share an
identity. Um, AND we join that group, but it,
but it goes deeper than that because it's not,
as I say, it's not just that we share
the identity. Once we, once we connect into a
group, we become more like that person, we become
more like that group, it changes us in quite
profound ways. And that, and like I said, that's,
that's true whether you're joining a religion or whether
you're getting married. I mean, you know, like, like
in 20 plus years of marriage to my wife,
I've become more like my wife. In, in lots
of ways I can tell, but also probably in
a million ways I can't tell, and she's become
more like me. And, and that's because we're a
successful cooperative partnership, you know, and that's the kind
of power of this, what they call shared reality.
It doesn't it's not just that you join a
group of like-minded people, it's just you, you let
that group take you over and you become more
similar to those people. So I think it's a,
it's a. Even more kind of powerful concept than
the idea of shared identity.
Why do we like underdog stories so much?
So underdog stories are universally popular all around the
world if you go through, you know, the folk
stories of, you know, Africa, East Asia, South America,
Russia, underdog stories are are are always told. We,
we, we, we identify with underdogs. And I think
there's a couple of diff there's a couple of,
there's there's a couple of big reasons for that.
So the first reason is, is, is that. The
underdog is the closest that we, we, we can
probably get to a universal description of the human
condition. You know, I, I said before about about
a story being an account of obstacles and goals.
I mean that's what we're doing as humans, we
are. Identifying goals and we're overcoming obstacles in pursuit
of them. So that's what we're constantly doing, we're
constantly looking for goals and and fighting obstacles. So
that makes us automatically an underdog. I mean that's
one of the definitions of an underdog is that
they're the, the, the problems of life seem immense
and almost insurmountable. So we, so we feel like
underdogs, and then certainly there are times of greatest
distress in our lives. We, we feel like underdogs.
And that and that even goes for um. Some
of the highest status people in the world at
the moment, like I expect Elon Musk at the
moment, as weird as it might seem, feels like
an underdog, and then you, and you might go,
that's crazy because he's the richest man in the
world. But also he's one of the most hated
men in the world right now. So that's that
that that that's, that's that's pretty, that's pretty a
that's a pretty terrifying place to be. You know,
I spent this part of Putin that feels like
an underdog because he's got, you know, the, the,
the, you know, the. You know, the, the, the,
the, the, the, the entire kind of west ranged
against him. So unless you're, you're suffering from pathological
narcissism, you, you pretty much feel like an underdog.
So I think that's that that that's one of
the big reasons why underdogs are so um universally,
we identify with them so easily, it's because when
we see somebody who's trying desperately trying to get
something, but there's massive obstacles in their way, part
of our brain goes, oh that's me. I'm like
that. Yeah, I get it, that, you know, so,
so that's that's one of the things. The other
thing is to do with with status and and
and how status games are played. Uh, IN, in
human groups. So the, the kinds of stats that
we really care about are um. You know, the,
the ones attached to prestige, a reputation, so, so
we want to be seen as a competent person
and, and a kind person, essentially, so success and
virtue are the are the kind of big things.
And the thing about prestige is we can't claim
it in human status, games in human groups, it
has to be earned, it has to be given
to us by other people, and that makes sense
when you think about the. It's purpose, which is
to get us to be cooperative members of a
group. So status is a reward. You can't fucking
go around demanding it. So if people go around
demanding status from other people, it gets our backs
up partly because that's not how we play status
games in human groups. We offer it to you,
you don't claim it, you know, and the other
thing is that status is relative. So if somebody
comes, swaggers into the room, you know, the old,
the big dick, um, and makes it clear that
they consider themselves the highest status person in the
room. Assuming you think they don't deserve it, I
mean, this might be like Tom Cruise coming in
into a group of like amateur actors, and in
which case it might be acceptable. But, but like
assuming you think they don't deserve it, he's gonna
really piss you off how they're acting, and again,
universally, you know, in hunter gatherer groups, there's lots
of policing that goes on with, you know, big
shot behavior they call it, this idea that someone's
swaggering in being the. Being the big I am,
so so so so so so so that's the
other thing, the underdog, it's the opposite of the
overdog, like you don't want to be an overdog,
because if you're an overdog, people are gonna hate
you and they're gonna not just hate you, but
they're gonna plot. Uh, uh, TOWARDS your downfall, so,
so it's, so it's a very, it's a very
bad strategy for success in human groups.
What is it that in your book you call
story being? What is that?
Well, story being is, you know, I, I, I,
I, I think one of the things that I
wanted to do with the story a deal is,
is that there, there, there's a, there's a zillion
books about persuasive stories, um, but, but, but they
all do that thing of talking about storytelling. So,
so how can I tell you a story which
is going to persuade you to do something, which
of course makes a lot of sense. But I
think it's actually missing the much greater piece of
the puzzle, which is the fact that it's not
just that we read stories and watch stories on
TV and on a stage, it's that our lives
are a story, we experience our daily life as
a story, when we go to work every day.
It's a story, you know, and it, it might
be a boring story to everybody else on earth,
but it's, but it's, but it's, it's, it's the
only story that really matters to us or the
main story that really matters to us. So, so,
so, so, so if you really wanna know how
to persuade other people, you've got to understand storytelling,
not just the things that we tell, but it's
something that we do. So that's when I talk
about story being, it's like if you want to,
if you're a leader. That wants to persuade your
team, if you're a politician that wants to persuade
your electorate, you have to show up in their
lives as the right kind of narrative character, as
a hero or a light figure or whatever it
is that you want to do. So that that
that that's what I mean by story being.
Uh, WHAT constitutes persuasive storytelling? I mean, what are
the characteristics associated with it?
Well, Three things really, main things. One is, the
first is identification, so you've got to tell a
story that people identify with, and then once they've
identified with it, you've got to offer them connection
and status. You know, so if you do those
three things. You know, you you you're you're an
incredibly incredibly powerful person, you know, you're a leader,
you're a guru, you're a priest, you're a prophet,
you know, whatever it is that you wanna be.
Yeah. Um, SO tell us about because this is
something you also go through in your book. Tell
us about an example of a successful marketing campaign
and another example of a non-successful campaign.
Yeah, OK, so. Um, WHAT'S the example of a,
of a successful marketing campaign, so that, so, so.
Um, ONE campaign which I'd never heard of, um,
was which, but if you're, if you've got Canadian
listeners and viewers, they will have probably heard of
this, was, was a was a campaign in the
year 2000 for Molson beer. So at the time,
Molson was suffering. It was the number one beer
brand in Canada, but it was suffering because people
started getting into drinking wine, and they were starting
to get into um drinking you know, microbreweries, it
was that hipster phase of microbreweries was it was
all in. So Molson was suffering, so, so they
got in a new um ad agency to to
to to to to to to try and rescue
them from the doldrums. And so the, the head
of ad agency was a Canadian guy. And he
was acutely aware of how irritating that Canadians found
it when Americans, and everybody else actually, mistook them
as American. Like Canadians don't like that, you know,
they just don't like that. It annoys them. So
he decided to sort of build an advert around
this whole concept. And so so so so so
so this what happens in this ad is that
um it's just a very ordinary looking guy in
a plaid shirt and jeans goes on a stage.
And he starts talking about all the things that
Canadians are that aren't American, essentially, so it's Z
not Z. Um, YOU know, we, we, we don't
say a boot, we say about, you know, all
the misconceptions, all the, all the mistakes, all the,
all the things that differentiate from them being American,
and he gets more and more and more passionate
as he goes along, and, um, and it just
ends up with a big shot of a molsome
beer. So if you look at that dispassionately, it's.
Mental, it doesn't make any sense because there's nothing
in the advertising campaign about the beer. It doesn't
tell you about how much it costs, what it
tastes like, it's calorie content, that it's fucking foamy
head or whatever it is that you might wanna,
you know, you you used to sell beer. There's
nothing information. All it is is basically. A description
of an identity, you know, it's offering connection, it's
offering that identification, so, yeah, yeah, that's like me,
but it's also offering status, it's saying, look, you
know, we're better than those Americans, you know, we,
we are great as Canadians, we do, you know,
we are, you know, we, we police by consent
and all these other things that they mentioned. So
there it was offering connection, it was offering status.
They pulled this genius move, the foot it debuted,
um, in the year 2000 in the uh during
the Academy Awards, the broadcast of the Oscars. And
it was directly after South Park performed their song
Blame Canada. So all the Canadians have watched South
Park do Blame Canada ad break, and he got,
you know, I am Canadian, which is what the
album is called I am Canadian. And it was
instantly successful, you know, it became completely viral in
kind of pre-social media, Canada, um. Oh, you know,
on Canada Day, groups of kids would would amass
and recite the rant. Um, I, I forget how
many millions, but within, within, within a matter of
weeks, millions have been added onto the, you know,
the share price of the Molson beer brand. It
was just enormously successful. So that, so that's a
really good example of a company that's that's that
that that that's using identity to sell a product
in a in a way that doesn't make sense
if you don't understand storytelling, because like so many
successful ads, it isn't about the actual product, it's
about, it's really about identity. Um, SO that's a
successful one. And I guess a really easy, uh,
really, yeah, a couple of easy recent examples, relatives
of unsuccessful ones, are as I do the opposite.
So I'm thinking specifically about the Gillette ad, the
best, is this the best man, I, I can't
remember what it was, but it was the one
where basically they were painting men as toxic males
who were just interested in. Bullying and they painted
men as, especially white men, it was, it was
white men in particular, you know, significantly as as
sex pest, bullies, just nasty pieces of work and
was basically saying, um, you can do better men.
So, so that's what's that doing? It's taking status
away, um, you know, and and what was their
reward where they got absolutely hammered. And then even
more recently there was of course the Bud Light
thing where, um, Dylan Mulvaney, who is a kind
of symbolically somebody that. Just oozes wokeness and and
you know, trying to sell a product which is
target which is mostly drunk by straight white men.
So, so, so, so, you know, it's, it's like
getting Jordan Peterson to advertise tampons, you know, it's
like it's just not gonna fucking work. So, so,
so again, you know, it's it's, it's taking status
away, it's basically um removing connection from the, from
Bud Light. It's basically if you, if you drink
Bud Light, you're a wokey now, you know, it's,
it's a total disaster and, and it was, and
both the Gillette Gillette ad and the Bud Light
ad were were psychologically incompetent. And they, you know,
and they were, they they they they were punished
financially, especially the Bud Light, I don't think Bud
Light have recovered from the, from, from their Dylan
Mulvaney ad campaign.
Yeah. So how can people write persuasive stories? What
steps can they follow?
Well, the first thing you need to do is
to figure out who you're trying to connect with.
You know, you can't tell a story, well, you
can. You, you, you can try to tell a
story that appeals to a kind of mass, mass
mass audience. But the but but the more mass
you get, the blander the ad gets, and you're
gonna have to rely on basic things like humor,
you know, get, get them laughing along. But if
you want to tell a really persuasive story, you
need you need to really figure out who your
audience is, what's the story world that they're living.
You know, in the middle of, um, what, what
language do they use? It's really important to figure
out how do they define status, you know, what
to them does a hero look like, because every
status game has a different definition of a hero.
The status game with the Buddhist monk and the
status game with the Wall Street banker have completely
different ways of talking, being, speaking, living, you know,
you've got to be, you've got to understand their
story world and just reflect it back to them.
And so that's, so once you've done that hard
work of figuring that out, as the blame as
the. You know, I Am Canadian ad shows, it's
sometimes simply a case of reflecting that back to
them. You know, and even like a much more
famous example is Apple's Think Different campaign, which, you
know, again, has no information about any Apple product
in it. It's just a series of black and
white pictures of people who've changed the world. Gandhi,
Mother Teresa, you know, John Lennon, Think Different. It's
basically saying, you know, creative world changers. If you
see you as yourself as a creative world changer,
buy an Apple computer because that's gonna give you
the identity of a creative world changer. So, so,
so sometimes it can be, it can be enough
to just reflect, just in, in a very specific
and accurate way, reflect back that identity to the
audience, and then once they see that they're gonna
be, they're gonna identify with you and they're gonna
be drawn to want to buy your product because,
you know. Part of what we're doing is is
trying to broadcast who we are, and so your
product becomes part of our cloud of uh our
our our our our cloud of social information. So
you know the Apple laptop computer we hope is
going to broadcast to the. You know, women across
the coffee shop that we are a creative world
changer, you know, that's how that works. And then
of course, and then as well as that, you,
you, you can offer status, you know, you know,
like um like a Nike ad that has Michael
Jordan in it, you, you, or you know, you
can say, look, if you, if you use our
product, you're gonna become a people like us, but
a, an elevated version of that. You're gonna become
this dream version of who, who you've always wanted
to be. And, and, and those are the those
are the persuasive stories that, that, that, that, that,
that have huge impacts. But, but, but, but you
have to achieve the identification first, you have to.
Connect with people's identities, and then once you've done
that, do the other stuff.
I have one last question then you begin your
book by talking about Theranos, the uh company. What
are the ways by which the power of storytelling
can be used to deceive and exploit people?
Well, I think the Theranos example is is just
a really good way of of of kind of
demonstrating what story being is. Um, SO, you know,
I think everybody probably knows the story of Elizabeth
Holmes. Um, SHE, um, said that she'd invented this
device called the Edison, and Edison was amazing. It
was a, you know, it was just this great
device that was like, like, so at the moment
to do a full range of blood tests on
something, you've got, you know, take out like two
big vials of blood. And the Edison could do
all that with one finger prick. So amazing, fantastic,
it's gonna save lives, it's gonna be brilliant. You
just go into your Walmart, do a finger prick
blood test and it's gonna, it's gonna figure you
out completely. Yeah. So she goes out and she,
she, she, she wants to get a board of
directors, she wants to get investors, and she does
it. She tells us, she, she, she, she, she
dresses up as Steve Jobs. She, she wears the
black polo neck, um she she lowers her voice
and starts speaking like you know in a very
masculine way. um, AND, and, and telling a story,
and, and people start saying this is a, this
is the female Steve Jobs. That was her story
that she is this amazing genius tech founder. And
you know, back then, and it's no different now,
people are desperate, people are desperate for that story,
they want to hear that story, like the story
where they tell of tech is it's full of
tech bros. Where are the female founders, where are
the where are the women who've started in the
incredible company. You know, led, you know, created incredible
products to change the world. Where are they? Well,
here she is. Here she is. So that became
an intoxicating story, and that's a story that offers
status. And so all of her board of directors
were men, I think it's important, all, all, you
know, men in late middle age, late middle age,
including um Henry Kissinger, er, including, you know, the
former director of the Centers for Disease Control, people
who really ought to have known better. Um, YOU
know, investors included the founders of the, you know,
the Walmart family, they included Rupert Murdoch. So, so
Theranos was, was the Murdoch family's, Rupert Murdoch's biggest
investment he ever made outside, um, his family of
companies. And the really important thing to know about
all of these people. Is that they didn't do
any due diligence. So due diligence is a completely
ordinary thing to do when you're investing in, of
course it is, like someone's coming to your office,
making all these claims, and you've got to figure
out, is it true? Is it true? And so
some people did do that. So somebody, so Google
Ventures were interested in in interested in um investing
in Theronos. And so they sent something out to
Walmart to get a Theranos blood test and to
his astonishment, they took out two massive vials of
blood from his arm. So he was like, this
is, this is something's weird, something's wrong here, so
they didn't invest. So some people didn't fall for
the story, but people like Rupert Murdoch and Henry
Kissinger and, you know, the former director of the
Centers for Disease Control, they did without. Doing any
due diligence, and I think, you know, they did
it because her story offered status. They wanted a
piece of her heroism. She was a hero. She
was on uh on, on, on, you know, magazine
cover after magazine cover. She was profiled in The
New Yorker, she was on TED Talk stages, Forbes
magazine stages. She was the female Steve Jobs and
they wanted a piece of it. And so that's
why, but in my estimation, why they were so
desperate to get involved with her is because of
the story, her story being, it was a story
that she was representing. And at the peak of
her powers, you know, her machine was worth nothing,
it had no value because it didn't exist. But
her story, her company was worth $9 billion. And,
and, and, and I think that story is you
know, it is important because of um the lack
of due diligence, but it's also important because of
the incredible. Success of the people who have felt
for it. Rupert Murdoch, you know, Henry Kissinger, you
know, these are incredibly smart, incredibly wily, incredibly successful
people, and she did a number on every single
one of them, and that's the power of storytelling.
So, but yeah, but in more general terms, how
can it be used to deceive and exploit other
people? I mean, what are the ingredients and the
ways that we can use storytelling to do that?
Well, I, yeah, I'm I'm, I'm a bit skeptical
about um this idea that people consciously use storytelling
to. Exploit and manipulate people. I, I think most
people like, I think, you know, there are the
Elizabeth Holmes's of the world for sure. But I
think, but, but I think most people who are
kind of leading groups that tell stories which we
know aren't true, they're not doing it in a
kind of Machiavellian ha ha ha kind of way.
They also genuinely believe their stories. I mean, I
spent the first part of my career as a
journalist when I was a journalist. Doing lots of
work with cults and you know, people who believe
crazy things like UFOs and ghosts and um you
know, Holocaust deniers and and so people talk about
those people as if they're evil, they're exploiters, you
know, like like you know like the the the
the um the TV mystic who's telling your. Future
and contacting your parents and you know, I found
a few of those people, but the vast majority
of the people that I ever met sincerely believed
the stuff, the bullshit that they were spouting. So,
so, so, you know, and you know, without, without
knowing it, they were offering connection, you know, like
that's what the spirituals doing, they're offering connection. That's
what religious people are doing. I mean, you know,
this kind of work has changed my view on
religion. I used to be very, very anti-religion, you
know, I've always been an atheist, but now I
understand, I see. The, the, the, the, the value
of religion is that it offers connection and status
to billions of people around the world, and we
need those things in our lives and you know,
and it especially offers them to people who are
who are living in much worse socioeconomic conditions than
we are in the West, so more power to
it, you know, in a way. Um, SO, so,
so, so, but, but I mean, to, to sort
of directly answer your question, I, the risk of
repeating myself, you know, it is that it is,
it, those are the things that we want, you
know, we, we, we want to join a group
of like-minded people, and, and, and once we're in
that group of like-minded people, we want to feel
that they value us and they respect us and
they esteem us and, and, and if we have
those things, we experience lives of meaning and purpose
and, you know, and general satisfaction as long as
things are going well, of course when things start
to go wrong, the pain comes.
Great. So the book is again, a story is
a deal, how to use the science of storytelling
to lead, motivate and persuade. I'm leaving a link
to it in the description below and also to
our first interview. So will, would you like to
tell people where they can find you and your
work on the internet? Yeah,
I'd love to. Yeah, so I have a stack.
It's called You Are a Story, um, and it's
weekly essays about this kind of thing, but also
about Um, you know, the, the, the kind of
pitfalls and pleasures of, of, of, of having this
kind of storytelling brain, so, um, um, that's at
Willstore.substack.com.
Great, so thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show again. It's always
a pleasure to everyone.
Thanks, Ricardo, it was a great pleasure to be
on. Thanks for your great questions.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Nes calling in Holbrookfield
governor Michael Stormir Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnunseroro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Lays and the Samuel Curriere,
Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus Fran David
Sloan Wilson, Asila dearraujoro and Roach Diego Londono Correa.
Yannick Punteran Rosmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevskynalebaa medicine,
Gary Galman Samov Zaledrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price,
Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franca Bartolotti Gabrielon
Scorteus Slelitsky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith John
Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai
Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams, the
Augusta, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez,
Coralli Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, Old
Eringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassy Zigoren,
Jeff McMahon, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas
Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Stor, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert,
Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George
Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert,
Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner,
Ursula Gudinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike
Levin, and Jos Net. A special thanks to my
producers. These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom
Venneden, Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedict Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine
and Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and
Nick Golden, and to my executive producers Matthew Levender,
Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for
all.